---
layout: page
title: Postglacial topographic response
description: Understanding the response of topography to glacial-interglacial cycles
img: assets/img/project_preview/postcold.jpg
importance: 2
category: Research
project_tag: postglacial
---

Earth’s topographic form is controlled by interactions between tectonics,
climate, and surface processes. Under constant conditions, rivers and hillslopes
tend to adjust their gradient so that erosion rates approximately balance
tectonic uplift rates. However, short-term perturbations in tectonics, climate,
or surface processes may create a temporary imbalance between erosion and
uplift.

Repeated glacial-interglacial cycles during the Quaternary have acted as such
perturbations in mid-latitude mountain ranges worldwide. Since the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM, ~25 thousand years ago), the transition from glacial to fluvial
and hillslope geomorphic processes has induced progressive adjustments of
topography in deglaciated landscapes, resulting in erosion rates that exceed or
lag tectonic uplift rates. For example, rockfalls and landsliding of steep
U-shaped glacial valleys grade hillslopes towards gentler, gradually eroding
V-shaped fluvial valleys, and, in some places, progressive fluvial incision
evacuates glacial sediments and dissects glacial terraces.

Understanding the timescales over which these adjustments occur before a new
quasi-equilibrium between erosion and uplift is reached is a key question for
understanding how Earth’s topography responds to periodic climatic
perturbations. If landscape response times exceed typical durations of
Quaternary interglacial periods (~20-50 thousand years), then mid-latitude
mountain ranges may be persistently adjusting and never reach an equilibrium
before the next glaciation occurs. On the contrary, if their response times are
shorter than interglacial periods, then Quaternary glaciations may only
fleetingly disrupt long-term tectonically driven landscape evolution.

### POSTCOLD - Understanding the influence of sediment dynamics on postglacial landscape evolution

_This project is funded by a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Postdoctoral Fellowship_.

In recently deglaciated landscapes, the transition from glacial to
fluvial/hillslope processes have induced progressive topographic adjustments,
and the large amounts of sediments inherited from glacial periods and generated
through landsliding of oversteepened glaciated topography may act as a
fundamental control on the incision of postglacial rivers. These sediments can
enhance fluvial incision rate by providing more tools for erosion, or inhibit
incision by armoring the river bed. Characterizing when and where sediment
enhances or inhibits fluvial incision in postglacial landscapes is critical for
understanding the changes in postglacial landscape evolution rates over time and
quantifying the response times of mountain ranges to deglaciation.

In this project, I propose to develop a landscape evolution model to account for
the complex impact of sediment dynamics on fluvial incision in postglacial
landscapes. I will utilize this model to investigate the response of fluvial
incision to changes in sediment supply and assess the effects of sediment on
postglacial landscape evolution. I will apply the model to quantify response
times of the deglaciated European Alp, leveraging the rich observational
datasets in this region. The proposed work will provide a quantitative
understanding of postglacial fluvial incision histories, which is critical for
ecosystem management and natural hazard assessment in recently deglaciated
mid-latitude mountain ranges and perhaps in high-latitude mountain ranges where
continued climate change may eventually lead to deglaciation.

### Postglacial fluvial network expansion in glaciated plains

Landscapes of the US Midwest were repeatedly affected by the southernmost
portions of the Laurentide Ice Sheet during the Quaternary. Over much of the
Midwest, depositional glacial processes diminished pre-glacial relief by filling
valleys and left constructional landforms including low-relief till plains and
high relief moraines. As the ice retreated, meltwater collected in subglacial or
proglacial lakes leaving fine-grained, sorted sediment in the form of glacial
lake plains. Glacial lakes episodically drained in outburst floods, carving deep
valleys.

However, meltwater valleys did not provide a landscape-wide integrated drainage
network. Instead, a significant fraction of the area of low-relief till plains
and glacial lake plains was occupied by closed depressions and remained
unconnected to external drainage networks. This area is referred to by
hydrologists as non-contributing area (NCA) because it does not typically
contribute surface runoff to stream networks. NCA becomes integrated into
external drainage networks over time.

By combining numerical simulations with field observations, our research found
that rates of postglacial fluvial incision and drainage network expansion are
controlled by the hydrological connection between the poorly-drained postglacial
plains and the growing river channels (Lai and Anders, 2018, _JGR_), and the
hydrological connection can be achieved via filling-spilling of small lakes or
groundwater (Cullen, et al., 2021, _ESPL_).


### Related publications:
<div class="publications">

    {% bibliography -f {{site.scholar.bibliography}} -q @*[project ^= *{{page.project_tag}}*]* %}

</div>
